
PAGE 1
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service 
to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will 
undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its 
final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could 
affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Accepted Manuscript
Endoscopy
Clinical outcomes and risk factors for local residual/recurrent tumors after en-
doscopic submucosal dissection including major papilla for laterally spreading 
ampullary tumors
Naohisa Yahagi, Teppei Akimoto, Yusaku Takatori, Motoki Sasaki, Kurato Miyazaki, Atsuto Kayashima, Teppei Masunaga, Kumiko 
Kirita, Mari Mizutani, Hiroki Tamagawa, Shintaro Kawasaki, Takashi Seino, Masayasu Horibe, Seiichiro Fukuhara, Noriko Matsuura, 
Atsushi Nakayama, Yasuhiro Ito, Tomohisa Sujino, Kaoru Takabayashi, Eisuke Iwasaki, Motohiko Kato. 
Affiliations below.
DOI: 10.1055/a-2944-4245 
Please cite this article as:  Yahagi N, Akimoto T, Takatori Y et al. Clinical outcomes and risk factors for local residual/recurrent tu-
mors after endoscopic submucosal dissection including major papilla for laterally spreading ampullary tumors. Endoscopy 2026. doi: 
10.1055/a-2944-4245 
Conflict of Interest:  Teppei Akimoto, Motohiko Kato, and Naohisa Yahagi serve as consultants and have received speaker honoraria 
from Olympus Corporation. Naohisa Yahagi receives royalties from Olympus Corporation, and Teppei Akimoto and Motohiko Kato have 
received research funding from Olympus Corporation. Motohiko Kato and Naohisa Yahagi also serve as consultants and have received 
speaker honoraria from FUJIFILM Corporation. Motohiko Kato has additionally received research funding from FUJIFILM Corporation. 
Motohiko Kato and Naohisa Yahagi have received speaker honoraria from AMCO Inc. Eisuke Iwasaki has received research funding from 
Gadelius Medical K.K. The remaining authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.    
Abstract:
Background and study aims: Endoscopic papillectomy (EP) enables resection of ampullary lesions but is limited by piecemeal 
resection and high recurrence rates. To overcome these limitations, we developed endoscopic submucosal dissection including 
papilla (ESDIP). This study aimed to evaluate clinical outcomes and identify risk factors for local residual/recurrent tumor after 
ESDIP for laterally spreading ampullary tumors.
Patients and methods: This single-center retrospective study analyzed consecutive patients who underwent ESDIP between 
2011 and 2024. The primary outcome was local residual/recurrent tumor after ESDIP. Risk factors for local residual/recurrent 
tumor were evaluated using Cox proportional hazards regression analysis.
Results: Of the 81 consecutive patients in whom ESDIP was attempted, three were converted to EP or surgery. En bloc resection 
was achieved in all 78 patients. After excluding 23 patients based on the predefined exclusion criteria, 55 patients were analy-
zed. The median tumor size was 38 mm (range, 15-128 mm). Negative horizontal and vertical margins, excluding the papillary 
ductal margin (PM), were achieved in 48 patients (87%), whereas negative PM and R0 resection were achieved in 34 patients 
(62%) and 29 patients (53%), respectively. Median follow-up was 31 months. The 3-year cumulative incidence of residual/recur-
rent tumor was 33%, and all residual/recurrent tumors were confined to the papilla. Positive/indeterminate PM was a signifi-
cant risk factor for local residual/recurrent tumor (hazard ratio, 8.35; 95% confidence interval, 2.35-29.64).
Conclusions: Although ESDIP enabled en bloc resection of laterally spreading ampullary tumors, the high rate of positive/inde-
terminate PM, resulting in frequent papilla-confined residual/recurrent tumors, remained its main limitation.
 
Corresponding Author: 
Dr. Teppei Akimoto, Keio University School of Medicine, Cancer Center, Division of Research and Development for Minimally Invasive 
Treatment, Shinjuku, Japan, t-akimoto@nms.ac.jp 
 Submission Date: 2026-03-03
 Accepted Date: 2026-08-23
 Accepted Manuscript online: 
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.
2026-08-26

PAGE 2
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service 
to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will 
undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its 
final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could 
affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Contributors‘ Statement: Naohisa Yahagi: Conceptualization, Investigation, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing 
- review & editing. Teppei Akimoto: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administrati-
on, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Yusaku Takatori: Data curation, Investigation, Resources, 
Writing - review & editing. Motoki Sasaki: Resources, Writing - review & editing. Kurato Miyazaki: Investigation, Resources, Writing - 
review & editing. Atsuto Kayashima: Resources, Writing - review & editing. Teppei Masunaga: Investigation, Resources, Writing - review 
& editing. Kumiko Kirita: Investigation, Resources, Writing - review & editing. Mari Mizutani: Investigation, Resources, Writing - review 
& editing. Hiroki Tamagawa: Resources, Writing - review & editing. Shintaro Kawasaki: Resources, Writing - review & editing. Takashi 
Seino: Resources, Writing - review & editing. Masayasu Horibe: Resources, Writing - review & editing. Seiichiro  Fukuhara: Investigation, 
Resources, Writing - review & editing. Noriko Matsuura: Investigation, Resources, Writing - review & editing. Atsushi Nakayama: Investi-
gation, Resources, Writing - review & editing. Yasuhiro  Ito: Resources, Writing - review & editing. Tomohisa Sujino: Resources, Writing - 
review & editing. Kaoru  Takabayashi: Investigation, Resources, Writing - review & editing. Eisuke Iwasaki: Investigation, Resources, Wri-
ting - review & editing. Motohiko Kato: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Supervision, Writing - review & editing.
Affiliations: 
Naohisa Yahagi, Keio University School of Medicine, Cancer Center, Division of Research and Development for Minimally Invasive Treat-
ment, Shinjuku, Japan
Teppei Akimoto, Keio University School of Medicine, Cancer Center, Division of Research and Development for Minimally Invasive Treat-
ment, Shinjuku, Japan
Yusaku Takatori, Keio University School of Medicine, Center for Diagnostic and Therapeutic Endoscopy, Shinjuku, Japan
[…]
Motohiko Kato, Keio University School of Medicine, Center for Diagnostic and Therapeutic Endoscopy, Shinjuku, Japan  
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 3
Clinical outcomes and risk factors for local residual/recurrent tumors after 
endoscopic submucosal dissection including major papilla for laterally spreading 
ampullary tumors
Naohisa Yahagi (Co-first author), MD, PhD1, Teppei Akimoto (Co-first author), MD, 
PhD1, Yusaku Takatori, MD, PhD2, Motoki Sasaki2, Kurato Miyazaki, MD, PhD2, 
Atsuto Kayashima, MD, PhD3, Teppei Masunaga, MD, PhD1, Kumiko Kirita, MD, 
PhD1, Mari Mizutani, MD, PhD2, Hiroki Tamagawa, MD, PhD3, Shintaro Kawasaki, 
MD2, Takashi Seino, MD, PhD3, Masayasu Horibe, MD, PhD3, Seiichiro Fukuhara, 
MD, PhD4, Noriko Matsuura, MD1, Atsushi Nakayama, MD, PhD1, Yasuhiro Ito, MD, 
PhD1, Tomohisa Sujino, MD, PhD5, 6, Kaoru Takabayashi, MD, PhD2, Eisuke Iwasaki, 
MD, PhD3, 7 and Motohiko Kato, MD, PhD2
1. Division of Research and Development for Minimally Invasive Treatment, Cancer 
Center, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
2. Center for Diagnostic and Therapeutic Endoscopy, Keio University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
3. Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
1
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 4
4. Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, National Hospital Organization, 
Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan
5.  Department of Multidimensional Analysis of Gastrointestinal Biology, Sakaguchi
Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
6. Keio Global Research Institute, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan 
7. Department of Gastroenterology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, 
Kanagawa, Japan
Running head: Local failure after ESD including papilla (ESDIP)
Key words: duodenal tumor, laterally spreading tumor involving the papilla, 
endoscopic submucosal dissection, endoscopic submucosal dissection including papilla,
papillary tumor
Correspondence and request for reprints to: Teppei Akimoto, MD, PhD
Division of Research and Development for Minimally Invasive Treatment, Cancer 
Center, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinanomachi 35, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
Phone: +81-3-5363-3437
Fax: +81-3-5363-3895
E-mail: t-akimoto@nms.ac.jp
2
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 5
IN BRIEF:
Duodenal laterally spreading lesions involving the major papilla are challenging to 
resect with high adverse event and recurrence rates. This single-centre retrospective 
study analyzed residual/recurrent lesion rates in patients undergoing endoscopic 
submucosal dissection involving the major papilla (ESDIP) between 2011 and 2024. In 
55 consecutive patients (median size 38mm), en-bloc resection was 100%. Pancreatitis, 
delayed bleeding and delayed perforation occurred in 13%, 16% and 2% respectively. 
Residual/recurrence was 33% at 3 years and papillary margin involvement was a 
significant risk factor.
3
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 6
Abstract
Background and study aims: Endoscopic papillectomy (EP) enables resection of 
ampullary lesions but is limited by piecemeal resection and high recurrence rates. To 
overcome these limitations, we developed endoscopic submucosal dissection including 
papilla (ESDIP). This study aimed to evaluate clinical outcomes and identify risk 
factors for local residual/recurrent tumor after ESDIP for laterally spreading ampullary 
tumors.
Patients and methods: This single-center retrospective study analyzed consecutive 
patients who underwent ESDIP between 2011 and 2024. The primary outcome was 
local residual/recurrent tumor after ESDIP. Risk factors for local residual/recurrent 
tumor were evaluated using Cox proportional hazards regression analysis.
Results: Of the 81 consecutive patients in whom ESDIP was attempted, three were 
converted to EP or surgery. En bloc resection was achieved in all 78 patients. After 
excluding 23 patients based on the predefined exclusion criteria, 55 patients were 
analyzed. The median tumor size was 38 mm (range, 15-128 mm). Negative horizontal 
and vertical margins, excluding the papillary ductal margin (PM), were achieved in 48 
patients (87%), whereas negative PM and R0 resection were achieved in 34 patients 
(62%) and 29 patients (53%), respectively. Median follow-up was 31 months. The 3-
year cumulative incidence of residual/recurrent tumor was 33%, and all 
4
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 7
residual/recurrent tumors were confined to the papilla. Positive/indeterminate PM was a
significant risk factor for local residual/recurrent tumor (hazard ratio, 8.35; 95% 
confidence interval, 2.35-29.64).
Conclusions: Although ESDIP enabled en bloc resection of laterally spreading 
ampullary tumors, the high rate of positive/indeterminate PM, resulting in frequent 
papilla-confined residual/recurrent tumors, remained its main limitation.
5
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 8
Abbreviations
PD: pancreaticoduodenectomy
EP: endoscopic papillectomy
ESDIP: endoscopic submucosal dissection including papilla
ESD: endoscopic submucosal dissection
FAP: familial adenomatous polyposis
EUS: endoscopic ultrasonography
HM: horizontal margin
VM: vertical margin
PM: papillary ductal margin
VCL: Vienna classification
APC: argon plasma coagulation
IDRFA: intraductal radiofrequency ablation
IDUS: intraductal ultrasonography
AEs: adverse events
PEP: post-ERCP pancreatitis
HR: hazard ratio
OR: odds ratio
CI: confidence interval
IQR: interquartile range
6
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 9
Introduction
Pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) is the standard curative treatment for ampullary 
carcinoma [1-3]. However, because of its invasiveness, less invasive alternative 
treatments such as transduodenal surgical ampullectomy and endoscopic papillectomy 
(EP) have been attempted for ampullary adenomas and intramucosal carcinomas [4-6]. 
In selected patients with carcinoma in situ or tumor limited to the ampullary mucosa of 
Vater without lymphovascular invasion [7], where the risk of lymph node metastasis is 
considered negligible, several studies have suggested that EP alone may achieve 
curative resection [8-12].
Nevertheless, EP has several limitations. Precise control of resection depth is 
technically challenging, and thermal artifact from electrocautery may compromise 
pathological assessment of both the horizontal and vertical margins including bile and 
pancreatic ducts [6,13,14]. In addition, for large lesions that cannot be captured entirely 
within the snare, piecemeal resection is often unavoidable, making R0 resection difficult
[5,15]. A further concern is the relatively high recurrence rate observed following EP
[5,6,16].
To overcome these limitations, we developed endoscopic submucosal dissection 
including papilla (ESDIP), a novel technique for large laterally spreading ampullary 
tumors [17]. This procedure applies established endoscopic submucosal dissection 
7
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 10
(ESD) techniques to the ampullary region, enabling en bloc resection with transection of
both the bile duct and pancreatic duct (Figure 1). However, the clinical outcomes and 
curative potential of ESDIP, including ductal margin status, remain unclear. Therefore, 
this study aimed to evaluate the outcomes of ESDIP and identify risk factors for 
residual and recurrent tumors, with an additional aim of identifying factors associated 
with ductal margin status.
Patients and Methods
Ethical considerations
This study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Keio 
University School of Medicine (No. 20190139) and conducted in accordance with the 
Declaration of Helsinki (revised in Fortaleza, Brazil, October 2013). Written informed 
consent for treatment was obtained from all participants, who were provided the 
opportunity to opt out of study participation via the hospital website.
Study design and eligible patients
This retrospective observational study was conducted at a tertiary care hospital. 
Consecutive patients who underwent ESDIP at Keio University School of Medicine 
between August 2011 and December 2024 were screened. Patients in whom ESDIP was
8
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 11
successfully completed without conversion to EP or emergency surgery were included. 
Eligible cases were identified from a prospectively maintained database. Exclusion 
criteria were: (1) patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP); (2) lesions 
confined to the minor papilla without extension to the major papilla; (3) recurrent 
lesions after EP; (4) additional surgery for submucosal invasive carcinoma diagnosed by
ESDIP; and (5) follow-up ≤6 months. Patients with FAP were excluded because of their
higher recurrence risk.
Indications, procedures and perioperative management of ESDIP
Detailed indications, procedures and perioperative management of ESDIP were 
described in our previous article [17]. The indications were as follows: (1) lesions 
without endoscopic evidence of submucosal invasion; (2) large lesions for which en 
bloc resection by EP was difficult; (3) lesions without apparent invasion into the 
pancreatic or intrapancreatic bile duct, as confirmed by radial endoscopic 
ultrasonography (EUS) (GF-UE260-AL5; Olympus Medical Systems Corporation, 
Tokyo, Japan) performed by an expert in pancreaticobiliary endoscopy.
Depending on the tumor size, circumferential location and maneuverability of 
the endoscope, either general anesthesia or deep sedation was selected. The endoscopes 
used were therapeutic gastrointestinal scopes equipped with a water-jet function (GIF-
9
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 12
H290T or GIF-Q260J; Olympus Medical Systems Corporation, or EG-840T or 
EG-840TP; FUJIFILM Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), fitted with a small-caliber 
transparent cap (DH-33GR, or DH-083ST; FUJIFILM Corporation). The procedures 
were performed under carbon dioxide insufflation. As the electrosurgical knife, a 1.5-
mm DualKnife J (Olympus Medical Systems Corporation) was used, and the 
electrosurgical units were VIO 300D or VIO 3 (ERBE Elektromedizine, Tubingen, 
Germany).
The basic procedure was similar to that of other gastrointestinal ESDs, but was 
performed entirely using the water pressure method [18-21]. A representative ESDIP 
procedure is shown in Video S1. After making the distal incision, a mucosal flap was 
created from the oral side, followed by submucosal dissection. The sphincter of the 
papilla was identified, dissected, and the lesion was resected and retrieved. 
Subsequently, for large mucosal defects, partial closure excluding the papilla was 
conducted using clips. In all cases, a pancreaticobiliary specialist performed endoscopic 
nasobiliary and nasopancreatic drainage. The drainage tubes were left in place for at 
least 3 days after ESDIP and removed depending on the patient’s condition. Detailed 
periprocedural management has been described in our previous report [17].
Management and follow-up after ESDIP
10
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 13
For adenoma or differentiated intramucosal carcinoma limited to the ampulla 
without lymphovascular invasion, follow-up with annual or semiannual endoscopy was 
recommended. Follow-up with computed tomography and tumor marker measurements 
was performed at the discretion of the attending physician. For lymphovascular 
invasion or submucosal invasive carcinoma, PD with lymph node dissection was 
recommended.
Initial follow-up endoscopy was generally performed within six months 
after ESDIP, or within three months for positive or indeterminate 
(positive/indeterminate) resection margins. During follow-up endoscopy, when a 
residual or recurrent (residual/recurrent) tumor was suspected, biopsy specimens were 
obtained from the papilla, the ESD scar, or the area adjacent to the scar at the discretion 
of the endoscopist. Follow-up duration was defined as the duration from treatment to 
the date of the last endoscopy.
Follow-up care was primarily conducted at our institution. However, some 
patients from distant areas with negative resection margins underwent initial follow-up 
at our institution and subsequent surveillance at local institutions according to each 
institution’s practice. For cases in which follow-up at our institution had been 
completed, we contacted the outside institutions providing subsequent follow-up care in
writing, and only the responses received were included in the dataset.
11
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 14
Clinicopathological variables
From medical records, we collected clinicopathological data on age, sex, 
circumferential location (medial wall or other), tumor size, macroscopic type 
(protruded, flat, or mixed type), papillary location within the lesion (peripheral type and
central type), histology, R0 resection, horizontal margin (HM), vertical margin (VM), 
and papillary ductal margin (PM). Tumor size was defined as the maximum diameter of 
the lesion measured on the resected specimen. Macroscopic type was classified 
according to the Paris classification as follows: type 0-I was defined as protruded type; 
types 0-IIa and 0-IIc as flat type; and types 0-IIa+I and 0-I+IIa as mixed type.
Papillary location was assessed on the resected specimen and categorized as 
central type when the papilla was located within the inner half of the lesion radius and 
as peripheral type when located within the outer half. Protruded lesions with an 
unidentifiable papillary orifice were classified as central type. Pathological diagnoses 
were classified according to the original Vienna classification (VCL) [22]. PM was 
defined as the resection margins at the transected bile and pancreatic ducts. R0 resection
was defined as the absence of pathological involvement at all margins, including the 
HM, VM, and PM. HM and VM were assessed in areas other than PM (Supplementary
Figure 1).
12
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 15
Procedural variables
We collected procedural data on treatment era (early or late), operator experience 
(super-expert or expert), anesthesia type (general anesthesia or deep sedation), resection
time, resection method (en-bloc or piecemeal), and length of hospital stay. The cases 
included in this study were divided into two groups, with the early treatment era 
(August 2011 to December 2022) and the late treatment era (January 2023 to December 
2024). Operators with >3000 ESDs across all organs and >200 duodenal ESDs were 
defined as super-experts, whereas those with >1000 ESDs and >100 duodenal ESDs 
were defined as experts.  The resection time was defined as the interval from the initial 
incision to completion of lesion resection.
Adverse events
Adverse events (AEs) included intraprocedural perforation, delayed bleeding, 
delayed perforation and post-ERCP pancreatitis (PEP). Intraprocedural perforation was 
defined as a full-thickness defect induced during ESD. Delayed bleeding was defined as
hematemesis, melena, or hemoglobin decrease >2 g/dL within 28 days requiring 
emergency endoscopy or blood transfusion. Delayed perforation was defined as 
imaging-confirmed perforation without intraprocedural perforation or 
13
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 16
intra-/retroperitoneal abscess after ESD. PEP was defined according to the Cotton 
criteria [23], and severity was assessed using the revised Atlanta classification [24].
Outcome measures
The primary outcome was local residual/recurrent tumor after ESDIP. A residual 
tumor was defined as a tumor histologically confirmed at the first follow-up endoscopy.
A recurrent tumor was defined as a tumor histologically confirmed after complete 
remission had been confirmed on at least one follow-up endoscopy. The secondary 
outcomes included the sites and management of residual/recurrent tumors, distant 
metastasis, disease-specific mortality, and all-cause mortality.
Statistical analysis
The cumulative incidence of local residual/recurrent tumors was estimated using 
the Kaplan–Meier method. Kaplan–Meier analysis with the log-rank test was performed
according to PM status (negative vs. positive/indeterminate) and histological category 
(VCL categories 3, 4, and 5.1). These variables were prespecified based on their 
established clinical relevance and reported associations with residual/recurrent tumors
[16,25,26]. Furthermore, Kaplan–Meier curves for local recurrence were generated after
excluding cases with residual tumors. Hazard ratios were calculated using univariate 
14
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 17
Cox proportional hazards regression analyses with the following covariates: age, sex, 
circumferential location, tumor size, macroscopic type, histology, HM, VM, and PM.
To identify factors associated with positive/indeterminate PM, univariate logistic 
regression analyses were conducted with the following covariates: age, sex, 
circumferential location, macroscopic type, tumor size, papillary location within the 
lesion, histology, treatment era, operator experience, anesthesia type, resection time, and
intraprocedural perforation. Given the limited number of events, multivariable Cox and 
logistic regression analyses were not performed to avoid overfitting.
Distant metastasis, disease-specific mortality, and all-cause mortality were 
summarized descriptively as numbers and percentages. All statistical analyses were 
performed using JMP Pro 17 software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA), and a p-value < 
0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results
Clinicopathological characteristics and procedural outcomes
Of the 81 patients in whom ESDIP was attempted, three were converted to EP or
emergency surgery. Among the 78 patients in whom ESDIP was successfully completed
with en bloc resection, 23 patients met the exclusion criteria, and 55 patients were 
analyzed (Figure 2). Detailed clinicopathological and procedural characteristics are 
15
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 18
summarized in Table 1. Among the 55 lesions, 49 (89%) were located on the medial 
wall, with a median tumor size of 38 mm (range, 15–128 mm).
Intraprocedural perforation occurred in 6 patients (11%); all were successfully 
closed using through-the-scope clips. Postprocedural AEs included PEP in 7 patients 
(13%) (mild in 6 and moderately severe in 1), delayed bleeding in 9 patients (16%), and
delayed perforation in 1 patient (2%). Of the delayed bleeding events, 5 were treated 
endoscopically, 1 by interventional radiology, and 3 conservatively. The delayed 
perforation was managed with endoscopic transnasal drainage of the abscess followed 
by internal drainage. Patients with postprocedural AEs had a median hospital stay of 12 
days (IQR, 8–14).
Histologically, 15 lesions (27%) were classified as VCL category 3 (VCL C3), 
23 (42%) as VCL C4, and 17 (31%) as VCL C5.1. R0 resection was achieved in 29 
lesions (53%). Both negative HM and VM were achieved in 48 lesions (87%), whereas 
the proportion of lesions with a negative PM was 34/55 (62%).
Residual/recurrent tumors and other clinical outcomes after ESDIP
The median follow-up duration was 31.0 months (interquartile range, 18.0–
48.7). Follow-up data for eight patients were obtained from outside institutions. Most 
16
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 19
patients who did not complete surveillance at our institution were referred from distant 
regions and subsequently continued follow-up at local institutions.
Local residual tumor was identified in 10 patients (18%), all at the papilla. Local
recurrence occurred in 5 patients (9%), also exclusively at the papilla. During follow-
up, no distant metastases or disease-specific deaths were observed. All-cause mortality 
occurred in one patient (1.8%), who died of a cause unrelated to the ampullary tumor. 
The cumulative incidence of local residual/recurrent tumors in the entire cohort was 
20% at 1 year and 33% at 3 years (Figure 3a). After excluding cases with residual 
tumors, the cumulative incidence of local recurrent tumors was 19% at 3 years 
(Supplementary Figure 2a).
Among the 15 patients with local residual/recurrent tumors, one underwent 
subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy for residual tumor associated 
with postprocedural stenosis. The other 14 patients underwent endoscopic retreatment 
using cold forceps polypectomy, argon plasma coagulation, EP, repeat ESDIP, or 
intraductal radiofrequency ablation, alone or in combination. A median of 2 retreatment 
sessions (range, 1–5) was required. Endoscopic remission was achieved in 12 patients. 
One required PD because of progression to adenocarcinoma despite repeated 
endoscopic treatment. Another developed a second adenoma recurrence after achieving 
17
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 20
endoscopic remission and, because of advanced age, remains under surveillance without
additional treatment. Details are shown in Supplementary Figure 3.
Risk factors for local residual/recurrent tumors
Kaplan–Meier analysis demonstrated that patients with positive/indeterminate 
PM had a significantly higher cumulative incidence of local residual/recurrent tumors 
compared with those with negative PM (log-rank test, p < 0.01) (Figure 3b). In 
contrast, no significant difference was observed among VCL categories, although 
patients with VCL C3 lesions showed a lower cumulative incidence of local 
residual/recurrent tumors (log-rank test, p = 0.10) (Figure 3c). Furthermore, Kaplan–
Meier analysis demonstrated that PM status remained significantly associated with local
recurrence after excluding cases with residual tumors (log-rank test, p < 0.01) 
(Supplementary Figure 2b).
In univariate Cox regression analysis, positive/indeterminate PM was associated 
with local residual/recurrent tumor (hazard ratio (HR), 8.35; 95% confidence interval 
(CI), 2.35–29.64; p < 0.01) (Table 2). Histology classified as VCL C4/5.1 showed a 
nonsignificant trend compared with VCL C3 (HR, 6.59; 95% CI, 0.87–50.22; p = 0.07).
 Factors associated with positive/indeterminate PM
18
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 21
Positive/indeterminate PM was observed in 21 patients (38%). In univariate 
logistic regression analysis, central papillary location within the lesion (OR, 7.68; 95% 
CI, 2.34–29.13; p < 0.01) and histology classified as VCL C4/5.1 (OR, 5.88; 95% CI, 
1.39–40.80; p = 0.03) were significantly associated with positive/indeterminate PM 
(Table 3). No procedure-related factors were significantly associated with PM 
involvement.
Discussion
This study is the first to clarify the outcomes of ESDIP for laterally spreading 
ampullary tumors and to identify risk factors for residual/recurrent tumors. In 55 cases, 
en bloc resection was feasible in all patients; however, positive/indeterminate PM 
remained common. Local residual/recurrent tumors occurred predominantly in patients 
with positive/indeterminate PM.
The main findings of this study were as follows: (1) ESDIP enabled en bloc 
resection of large ampullary tumors that are usually difficult to resect en bloc with EP; 
(2) the cumulative incidence of local residual/recurrent tumor was as high as 33% at 3 
years, and positive/indeterminate PM was significantly associated with local 
residual/recurrent tumor; and (3) in univariate analysis, histology classified as VCL 
19
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 22
C4/5.1 and central papillary location within the lesion were associated with 
positive/indeterminate PM.
In this study, some patients showed positive PMs despite the absence of 
intraductal extension on preoperative EUS, suggesting limitations of EUS for detecting 
subtle intraductal extension. Although intraductal ultrasonography (IDUS) has been 
reported to provide greater accuracy for evaluating biliary and pancreatic ductal 
extension, its use carries a risk of PEP [6]. Because IDUS was not performed in our 
cohort, its potential value for predicting ductal margin status in ESDIP remains 
speculative and should be investigated in future studies.
Local recurrence was observed even after achieving negative PM, suggesting a 
limitation in pathological assessment. Because the PM is sectioned at 2-mm intervals, as
in specimens resected by conventional ESD, microscopic involvement between slices 
may be missed, resulting in false-negative diagnosis. Likewise, local recurrence has 
been reported after EP despite achieving R0 resection [16]. Therefore, careful 
endoscopic surveillance is warranted even in patients with pathologically negative PM.
The present study could not distinguish whether the lesions originated from the 
papilla itself or represented non-ampullary tumors with lateral extension involving the 
papilla; further pathological investigations are needed to elucidate the true risk of 
positive PM and intraductal extension. In univariate analysis, central papillary location 
20
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 23
within the lesion and histology classified as VCL C4/5.1 were associated with 
positive/indeterminate PM. This analysis of papillary location was based on the 
hypothesis that when the papilla is located closer to the center of the lesion, the risk of 
intraductal extension may be higher, whereas when it is located near the lesion margin, 
the risk may be lower and PM negativity may be more likely to be achieved. Previous 
EP studies have also reported associations between histological category and margin 
positivity or recurrence [25,26]. However, because both histology and papillary location
were assessed on resected specimens, these findings should be considered hypothesis-
generating. Moreover, as the analyses were unadjusted, they should not be interpreted as
independent predictors or directly applied to preprocedural assessment. Their clinical 
applicability remains to be established in future studies.
According to the ESGE guidelines, en bloc resection of ampullary adenomas up 
to 20–30 mm is recommended to achieve R0 resection, optimize pathological 
assessment, and reduce recurrence after EP, whereas surgery is suggested for lesions 
larger than 4 cm because of technical difficulties [5]. Our findings demonstrated that 
ESDIP enables optimal histopathological evaluation by providing en bloc specimens 
even for such lesions; however, margin management, particularly PM involvement, 
remains the greatest challenge.
21
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 24
In some centers, laterally spreading ampullary tumors have been managed by 
piecemeal EP [27-30], with residual/recurrent rates of 18% (7/39) to 42% (15/35) at first
surveillance [27,30], and a recurrence rate of 20% (4/20) during a median follow-up of 
14.7 months [29]. In the present study, the cumulative incidence of residual/recurrent 
tumors was 20% at 1 year and 33% at 3 years, suggesting that clinical outcomes of 
ESDIP may not be superior to piecemeal resection unless margin negativity is achieved.
Reports on ESDIP are limited [17,31-34]. The pathological R0 resection rate in our 
cohort was 53%, lower than the 81.8% (9/11) reported in one previous series of ESD for
laterally spreading ampullary tumors [34]. On the other hand, another study reported an 
R0 resection rate as low as 12.5% (1/8) [33], suggesting substantial variability related to
technical expertise or lesion characteristics.
Compared with a recent multicenter study of EP for laterally spreading 
ampullary tumors [35], including piecemeal resection, ESDIP was associated with a 
higher rate of intraprocedural perforation (10.9% [95% CI, 5.1%–21.8%] vs. 6.9% [95%
CI, 3.2%–12.9%]), whereas the rates of bleeding (16.4% [95% CI, 8.9%–28.3%] vs. 
22.4% [95% CI, 15.6%–31.0%]) and pancreatitis (12.7% [95% CI, 6.3%–24.0%] vs. 
9.5% [95% CI, 5.0%–16.3%]) were within a similar range. In the EP cohort, the 
recurrence rate was 41.3% after a median follow-up of 22 months, and recurrent lesions 
22
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 25
were observed not only at the papilla but also in the laterally spreading component. In 
contrast, all residual/recurrent tumors in the present study were confined to the papilla. 
This may reflect the high rates of negative HM and VM achieved by ESDIP and suggest
effective control of the laterally spreading component. Nevertheless, the relatively high 
rate of positive/indeterminate PM and the occurrence of papillary residual/recurrent 
tumors remain the major limitations of ESDIP, potentially offsetting the benefit of 
improved pathological assessment and complete resection of the laterally spreading 
component.
In the present study, management of residual/recurrent tumors often required 
multiple retreatment sessions and advanced salvage procedures. Moreover, two patients 
ultimately required surgery. These findings suggest that residual/recurrent tumors after 
ESDIP remain an important clinical issue and may impose a substantial treatment 
burden despite the availability of endoscopic salvage therapies.
This study has several limitations. First, this was a single-center retrospective 
study with a limited number of cases, and no direct comparison with alternative 
treatment was performed. Most lesions treated with EP were smaller than those in the 
present cohort, making comparison between ESDIP and EP difficult because of 
selection bias. Second, exclusion of unsuccessful or complex cases may have introduced
selection bias, potentially overestimating the safety and efficacy of ESDIP. Third, 
23
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 26
follow-up protocols were not fully standardized, and surveillance at outside institutions 
was conducted at the discretion of the attending physician or institution, which may 
have led to under-reporting of metastasis, recurrences, and AEs. Fourth, the primary 
endoscopist, the assistant, and clinicians responsible for postprocedural management 
were highly experienced in duodenal ESD. Despite this expertise, AEs were not 
uncommon and may be more frequent in lower-volume centers or among less 
experienced operators. Fifth, the limited number of outcome events did not allow 
multivariable regression analyses; therefore, the associations of papillary location and 
histological category with positive/indeterminate PM should not be interpreted as 
independent predictors. Sixth, the median follow-up period was relatively short at 31.0 
months, and longer observation is required to evaluate long-term outcomes, particularly 
considering the high incidence of local residual/recurrent tumors observed in this 
cohort. Finally, the influence of thermal artifact on margin assessment could not be 
completely excluded and may have contributed to pathological uncertainty.
In conclusion, although ESDIP enabled en bloc resection of laterally spreading 
ampullary tumors, local residual/recurrent tumors remained relatively common and 
were observed exclusively at the papilla. Positive/indeterminate PM was the key 
determinant of local residual/recurrent tumors. The clinical applicability of the factors 
24
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 27
associated with positive/indeterminate PM requires further investigation because of the 
methodological and statistical limitations. Considering its technical complexity, the 
occurrence of AEs, the modest R0 resection rate, and the relatively high rate of local 
failure, ESDIP remains a developing technique and should currently be limited to expert
centers.
Conflict of Interest
Teppei Akimoto, Motohiko Kato, and Naohisa Yahagi serve as consultants and have 
received speaker honoraria from Olympus Corporation. Naohisa Yahagi receives 
royalties from Olympus Corporation, and Teppei Akimoto and Motohiko Kato have 
received research funding from Olympus Corporation. Motohiko Kato and Naohisa 
Yahagi also serve as consultants and have received speaker honoraria from FUJIFILM 
Corporation. Motohiko Kato has additionally received research funding from 
FUJIFILM Corporation. Motohiko Kato and Naohisa Yahagi have received speaker 
honoraria from AMCO Inc. Eisuke Iwasaki has received research funding from 
Gadelius Medical K.K. The remaining authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.
Declaration of Generative AI Use
25
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 28
Artificial intelligence–assisted tools were used solely for language editing to improve 
clarity and readability. All data analyses, interpretations, and conclusions were 
performed by the authors, who take full responsibility for the content of this manuscript.
26
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 29
References
1. Chiorean EG, Chiaro MD, Tempero MA et al. Ampullary Adenocarcinoma, 
Version 1.2023, NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology. J Natl Compr 
Canc Netw 2023; 21: 753-782
2. Hautefeuille V, Williet N, Turpin A et al. Ampullary tumors: French Intergroup 
Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatments and follow-up (TNCD, 
SNFGE, FFCD, UNICANCER, GERCOR, SFCD, SFED, ACHBT, AFC, 
SFRO, RENAPE, SNFCP, AFEF, SFP, SFR). Dig Liver Dis 2024; 56: 1452-
1460
3. Nagino M, Hirano S, Yoshitomi H et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the 
management of biliary tract cancers 2019: The 3rd English edition. J 
Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 2021; 28: 26-54
4. ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Chathadi KV, Khashab MA et al. The 
role of endoscopy in ampullary and duodenal adenomas. Gastrointest Endosc 
2015; 82: 773-781
5. Vanbiervliet G, Strijker M, Arvanitakis M et al. Endoscopic management of 
ampullary tumors: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) 
Guideline. Endoscopy 2021; 53: 429-448
27
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 30
6. Itoi T, Ryozawa S, Katanuma A et al. Clinical practice guidelines for endoscopic
papillectomy. Dig Endosc 2022; 34: 394-411
7. Amin MB, Greene FL, Edge SB et al. The Eighth Edition AJCC Cancer Staging 
Manual: Continuing to build a bridge from a population-based to a more 
"personalized" approach to cancer staging. CA Cancer J Clin 2017; 67: 93-99
8. Yoon SM, Kim MH, Kim MJ et al. Focal early stage cancer in ampullary 
adenoma: surgery or endoscopic papillectomy? Gastrointest Endosc 2007; 66: 
701-707
9. Yamao T, Isomoto H, Kohno S et al. Endoscopic snare papillectomy with biliary
and pancreatic stent placement for tumors of the major duodenal papilla. Surg 
Endosc 2010; 24: 119-124
10. Ceppa EP, Burbridge RA, Rialon KL et al. Endoscopic versus surgical 
ampullectomy: an algorithm to treat disease of the ampulla of Vater. Ann Surg 
2013; 257: 315-322
11. Napoleon B, Gincul R, Ponchon T et al. Endoscopic papillectomy for early 
ampullary tumors: long-term results from a large multicenter prospective study. 
Endoscopy 2014; 46: 127-134
12. Yamamoto K, Itoi T, Sofuni A et al. Expanding the indication of endoscopic 
papillectomy for T1a ampullary carcinoma. Dig Endosc 2019; 31: 188-196
28
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 31
13. Iwasaki E, Minami K, Itoi T et al. Impact of electrical pulse cut mode during 
endoscopic papillectomy: Pilot randomized clinical trial. Dig Endosc 2020; 32: 
127-135
14. Miyamoto S, Serikawa M, Ishii Y et al. The Significance of Histopathological 
Findings on Clinical Outcomes in Endoscopic Papillectomy with Endocut. J Clin
Med 2023; 12: 6853
15. Spadaccini M, Fugazza A, Frazzoni L et al. Endoscopic papillectomy for 
neoplastic ampullary lesions: A systematic review with pooled analysis. United 
European Gastroenterol J 2020; 8: 44-51
16. Iwasaki E, Kawashima H, Takada Y et al. Clinical outcomes of endoscopic 
papillectomy for ampullary adenoma and adenocarcinoma: a multicenter 
retrospective study in Japan. Gastrointest Endosc 2026; 103: 1016-1027.e5
17. Yahagi N, Takatori Y, Sasaki M et al. Feasibility of endoscopic submucosal 
dissection including papilla (with video). Dig Endosc 2025; 37: 402-410
18. Yahagi N, Nishizawa T, Sasaki M et al. Water pressure method for duodenal 
endoscopic submucosal dissection. Endoscopy 2017; 49: E227-E228
19. Kato M, Takatori Y, Sasaki M et al. Water pressure method for duodenal 
endoscopic submucosal dissection (with video). Gastrointest Endosc 2021; 93: 
942-949
29
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 32
20. Kirita K, Akimoto T, Niikawa M et al. Efficacy of water pressure method for 
colorectal endoscopic submucosal dissection: Propensity-score matching 
analysis. Endosc Int Open 2025; 13: a25442654
21. Akimoto T, Yahagi N, Kato M. Facilitating Colorectal Endoscopic Submucosal 
Dissection: Devices and Techniques. Tech Innov Gastrointest Endosc 2025; 27: 
250932
22. Schlemper RJ, Riddell RH, Kato Y et al. The Vienna classification of 
gastrointestinal epithelial neoplasia. Gut 2000; 47: 251-255
23. Cotton PB, Lehman G, Vennes J et al. Endoscopic sphincterotomy 
complications and their management: an attempt at consensus. Gastrointest 
Endosc 1991; 37: 383-393
24. Banks PA, Bollen TL, Dervenis C et al. Classification of acute 
pancreatitis-2012: revision of the Atlanta classification and definitions by 
international consensus. Gut 2013; 62: 102-111
25. Liu K, Zhuang Y, Gao N et al. Risk factors for recurrence after endoscopic 
papillectomy in ampullary adenomas: a retrospective case-control study. Therap 
Adv Gastroenterol 2025; 18: 17562848251343419
30
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 33
26. Ridtitid W, Tan D, Schmidt SE et al. Endoscopic papillectomy: risk factors for 
incomplete resection and recurrence during long-term follow-up. Gastrointest 
Endosc 2014; 79: 289-296
27. Klein A, Qi Z, Bahin FF et al. Outcomes after endoscopic resection of large 
laterally spreading lesions of the papilla and conventional ampullary adenomas 
are equivalent. Endoscopy 2018; 50: 972-983
28. Yamamoto K, Sofuni A, Tsuchiya T et al. Clinical Impact of Piecemeal 
Resection Concerning the Lateral Spread of Ampullary Adenomas. Intern Med 
2019; 58: 901-906
29. van der Wiel SE, Poley JW, Koch AD et al. Endoscopic resection of advanced 
ampullary adenomas: a single-center 14-year retrospective cohort study. Surg 
Endosc 2019; 33: 1180-1188
30. Sahar N, Krishnamoorthi R, Kozarek RA et al. Long-Term Outcomes of 
Endoscopic Papillectomy for Ampullary Adenomas. Dig Dis Sci 2020; 65: 260-
268
31. Dohi O, Ishida T, Doi T et al. Endoscopic submucosal dissection for a laterally 
spreading ampullary carcinoma. VideoGIE 2022; 7: 79-81
31
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 34
32. Miwa H, Hirasawa K, Endo K et al. A novel reshapable catheter facilitates 
selective biliary and pancreatic duct cannulation following endoscopic 
submucosal dissection including papilla. Endoscopy 2025; 57: E481-E483
33. Kano Y, Ohata K, Iida T et al. Efficacy and safety of endoscopic submucosal 
dissection versus endoscopic papillectomy for managing laterally spreading 
duodenal papillary tumors. Clin Endosc 2025; 58: 712-721
34. Hirose T, Takada Y, Furukawa K et al. New Endoscopic Strategy for Ampullary
Tumor and Superficial Nonampullary Duodenal Epithelial Tumor Extending 
Into Papillary Area. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 2025; 32: 706-712
35. Vu Trung K, Abou-Ali E, Gulla A et al. Endoscopic papillectomy for laterally 
spreading lesions of the papilla: a propensity score-matched analysis. Endoscopy
2026; 58: 27-36
32
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 35
Table/Figure legends
Table 1. Clinicopathological and procedural characteristics of the patients and lesions 
treated with ESDIP (N = 55)
Table 2. Univariate Cox regression analysis of risk factors for local residual or recurrent
tumor after ESDIP
Table 3. Univariate logistic regression analysis of factors associated with positive or 
indeterminate papillary ductal margin after ESDIP
Figure 1. A representative case of endoscopic submucosal dissection including papilla 
(ESDIP). (a) A 30-mm flat laterally spreading ampullary tumor. (b) Creation of a 
submucosal pocket and subsequent dissection using the water pressure method. (c) 
Transection of the sphincter of the papilla and the bile and pancreatic ducts. Yellow 
arrowhead: bile duct; blue arrowhead: pancreatic duct. (d) Nasobiliary and 
nasopancreatic drainage tubes were promptly placed after resection. (e) Resected 
specimen. The pathological diagnosis was high-grade adenoma, with negative 
horizontal and vertical margins but a positive papillary ductal margin. (f) A local 
residual tumor was observed at the papilla. (g, h) Combined salvage treatment with 
33
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 36
endoscopic papillectomy and intraductal radiofrequency ablation was performed. (i) 
Complete remission was ultimately achieved after four salvage treatment sessions.
Figure 2. Study flowchart of the patients included in this study. ESDIP, endoscopic 
submucosal dissection including papilla; EP, endoscopic papillectomy; PD, 
pancreaticoduodenectomy.
Figure 3. Kaplan–Meier curves for local residual or recurrent tumors after endoscopic 
submucosal dissection including papilla according to: (a) all cases; (b) papillary ductal 
margin (PM) status (positive/indeterminate vs. negative); and (c) histology based on the 
Vienna classification (VCL).
34
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 37
Tables
Table 1. Clinicopathological and procedural characteristics of the 
patients and lesions treated with ESDIP (N = 55)
Age, median [range], years 66 [33-83]
Sex, male, n (%) 33 (60)
Circumferential location, n (%)
Medial wall 49 (89)
Other 6 (11)
Tumor size, median [range], mm 38 [15-128]
Macroscopic type (Paris classification), n (%)
Protruded type (0-I) 6 (11)
Flat type (0-IIa, 0-IIc) 37 (67)
Mixed type (0-IIa+I, 0-I+IIa) 12 (22)
Treatment era, n (%)
Early (2011-2022) 27 (49)
Late (2023-2024) 28 (51)
Operator experience, n (%)
Super-expert (>3000 ESDs and >200 DESDs) 41 (75)
Expert (>1000 ESDs and >100 DESDs) 14 (25)
Anesthesia type, n (%)
General anesthesia 25 (45)
Deep sedation 30 (55)
Resection time, median [IQR], minutes 65 [36-85]
Intraprocedural perforation, n (%) 6 (11)
Post-ERCP pancreatitis, n (%) 7 (13)
Mild 6 (11)
Moderately severe 1 (2)
Delayed bleeding, n (%) 9 (16)
Delayed perforation, n (%) 1 (2)
Hospital stay, median [IQR], days 10 [7-13]
Resection method, n (%)
En bloc 55 (100)
35
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 38
Piecemeal 0 (0)
Histology*, n (%)
VCL category 3 15 (27)
VCL category 4 23 (42)
VCL category 5.1 17 (31)
R0 resection, n (%) 29 (53)
Negative HM, n (%) 50 (91)
Negative VM, n (%) 52 (95)
Both negative HM and VM, n (%) 48 (87)
Negative PM, n (%) 34 (62)
*According to the original Vienna classification (VCL), category 3 
indicates non-invasive low-grade neoplasia; category 4, non-invasive high-
grade neoplasia; and category 5.1, intramucosal carcinoma [22].
ESDIP, endoscopic submucosal dissection including papilla; ESD, 
endoscopic submucosal dissection; DESD, duodenal endoscopic 
submucosal dissection; IQR, interquartile range; ERCP, endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography; HM, horizontal margin; VM, vertical
margin; PM, papillary ductal margin
36
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 39
Table 2. Univariate Cox regression analysis of risk factors for local residual or recurrent tumor after ESDIP
Variables No. of
events
No. of
patients HR (95% CI) P value
Age Per 1-year increase 15 55 1.01 (0.96－1.06) 0.72
Sex Male 9 33 1.00 (reference) －
　 Female 6 22 0.92 (0.33－2.61) 0.88
Circumferential 
location Medial wall 13 49 1.00 (reference) －
Other (AW or PW) 2 6 1.63 (0.37－7.25) 0.52
Tumor size Per 5-mm increase 15 55 1.06 (0.96－1.15) 0.22
Macroscopic type
(Paris classification)
Protruded type (0-I) 3 6 1.00 (reference) －
Flat type (0-IIa or 0-IIc) 9 37 0.49 (0.14－1.79) 0.28
Mixed type (0-IIa+I or 0-I+IIa) 3 12 0.28 (0.05－1.70) 0.17
Histology VCL category 3 1 15 1.00 (reference) －
　 VCL category 4 or 5.1* 14 40 6.59 (0.87－50.22) 0.07
HM Negative 13 50 1.00 (reference) －
37
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 40
Positive or indeterminate 2 5 1.43 (0.32－6.36) 0.64
VM Negative 15 52
Not estimable†
－
　 Positive or indeterminate 0 3 －
PM Negative 3 34 1.00 (reference) －
　 Positive or indeterminate 12 21 8.35 (2.35－29.64) < 0.01
*Exploratory univariate Cox model including indicator terms for VCL C4 and C5.1 (reference = C3): C4 vs C3, HR = 5.71 (95% CI, 0.70－46.55); 
C5.1 vs C3, HR = 8.25 (95% CI, 1.01－67.61). These estimates were not multiplicity-adjusted.
†Not estimable because no event occurred in the positive/indeterminate VM group.
ESDIP, endoscopic submucosal dissection including papilla; HR, hazard ratio; CI, confidence interval; AW, anterior wall; PW, posterior wall; VCL, 
Vienna classification; HM, horizontal margin; VM, vertical margin; PM, papillary ductal margin.
38
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 41
Table 3. Univariate logistic regression analysis of factors associated with positive or indeterminate papillary ductal margin ESDIP
Variables No. of
events
No. of
patients Odds ratio (95% CI) P value
Age Per 1-year increase 21 55 0.99 (0.95－1.04) 0.82
Sex Male 12 33 1.00 (reference) －
　　 Female 9 22 1.21 (0.40－3.68) 0.73
Circumferential 
location Medial wall 17 49 1.00 (reference) －
Other (AW or PW) 4 6 3.76 (0.67－29.21) 0.13
Macroscopic type
(Paris classification)
Protruded type (0-I) 4 6 1.00 (reference) －
Flat type (0-IIa or 0-IIc) 13 37 0.27 (0.03－1.58) 0.15
　　 Mixed type (0-IIa+I or 0-I+IIa) 4 12 0.25 (0.03－1.86) 0.18
Tumor size Per 5-mm increase 21 55 1.01 (0.90－1.14) 0.82
Papillary location 
within the lesion Peripheral type 5 29 1.00 (reference) －
Central type 16 26 7.68 (2.34－29.13) < 0.01
Histology VCL category 3 2 15 1.00 (reference) －
39
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 42
VCL category 4 or 5.1 19 40 5.88 (1.39－40.80) 0.03
Treatment era Early (2011-2022) 11 27 1.00 (reference) －
　　 Late (2023-2024) 10 28 0.81 (0.27－2.41) 0.70
Operator experience Super-expert 15 41 1.00 (reference) －
Expert 6 14 1.30 (0.37－4.47) 0.68
Anesthesia type General anesthesia 8 25 1.00 (reference) －
　　 Deep sedation 13 30 1.63 (0.54－5.07) 0.39
Resection time Per 10-minute increase 21 55 1.05 (0.92－1.19) 0.48
Intraprocedural 
perforation No 17 49 1.00 (reference) －
Yes 4 6 3.76 (0.67－29.21) 0.13
ESDIP, endoscopic submucosal dissection including papilla; CI, confidence interval; AW, anterior wall; PW, posterior wall; VCL, Vienna 
classification
40
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 43
Supplementary material.
Naohisa Yahagi, Teppei Akimoto, Yusaku Takatori, Motoki Sasaki, Kurato Miyazaki, 
Atsuto Kayashima, Teppei Masunaga, Kumiko Kirita, Mari Mizutani, Hiroki 
Tamagawa, Shintaro Kawasaki, Takashi Seino, Masayasu Horibe, Seiichiro Fukuhara, 
Noriko Matsuura, MD, Atsushi Nakayama, Yasuhiro Ito, Tomohisa Sujino, Kaoru 
Takabayashi, Eisuke Iwasaki, and Motohiko Kato
Clinical outcomes and risk factors for local residual/recurrent tumors after 
endoscopic submucosal dissection including papilla for laterally spreading 
ampullary tumors.
Video S1. The endoscopic submucosal dissection including papilla procedure was 
performed using the water pressure method. After a distal incision, a mucosal flap was 
created from the oral side and submucosal dissection was carried out. The sphincter of 
the papilla was identified and dissected, allowing complete resection and retrieval of the
lesion. At the end of the procedure, a pancreaticobiliary specialist placed nasobiliary 
and nasopancreatic drainage tubes, which were left in place for at least 3 days and 
removed depending on the patient’s condition.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 44
Supplementary Figure 1. Definitions of tumor size, papillary location, and resection 
margins in resected specimens. (a) Tumor size was defined as the maximum diameter of
the lesion (yellow arrow). (b) Papillary location within the lesion was classified as 
follows. The blue, yellow and orange areas represent the resected specimen, tumor, and 
papilla, respectively. When the papillary orifice was located within the dotted oval, the 
papillary location was defined as the central type; otherwise, it was defined as 
peripheral type. The figure shows the central type. (c) Horizontal margin (HM) and 
vertical margin (VM) were evaluated in lesion areas excluding the papillary ductal 
margin (PM).
Supplementary Figure 2. Kaplan–Meier curves for local recurrent tumors after 
endoscopic submucosal dissection including papilla after excluding cases with residual 
tumors according to: (a) all cases; and (b) papillary ductal margin (PM) status 
(positive/indeterminate vs. negative).
Supplementary Figure 3. Individual follow-up courses, additional treatments, and 
outcomes of patients with residual or recurrent tumors after endoscopic submucosal 
dissection including papilla (ESDIP). Cases 1–10 represent residual tumors, whereas 
cases 11–15 represent recurrent tumors. *Subtotal stomach-preserving 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 45
pancreaticoduodenectomy (SSPPD) was performed because of postprocedural stenosis 
and residual tumor. CFP, cold forceps polypectomy; APC, argon plasma coagulation; 
IDRFA, intraductal radiofrequency ablation; EP, endoscopic papillectomy; PD, 
pancreaticoduodenectomy.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 46
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 47
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 48
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 49
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 50
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 51
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 52
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 53
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.


PAGE 54
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
Downloaded by: Shibboleth-Proxy Keio University Tokyo, Faculty of Medicine, Keio University Shinanomachi Media Center. Copyrighted material.
